Good day i'm Norman Wildberger definitions are
very important in mathematics and especially
important in geometry where our natural intuition
often tempts us to forgo proper definitions today
we're going to talk about a subject which often
isn't pinned down very precisely in elementary
courses how to define quadrilaterals
quadrangles and more generally n-gons
so let me remind you that we're talking
just about basic elementary geometry
everything built up over the rational
numbers and we have been talking about points
so a point for us is just an ordered pair of
numbers say x y and we've been talking about
lines for us a line is a triple a to b to c
a proportion enclosed in pointy brackets and
we have a relation of incidence between points
and lines in terms of this equation here
and we talked last time about the definition of
a triangle this is just one of several possible
definitions but it's a very convenient one for
us a set of three non-linear points is what a
triangle actually is so here's points a b and c
they are not collinear in other words they do not
all lie on a straight line and so they define a
triangle and precisely it means that the triangle
is actually a set so it's a set containing three
objects the three objects are these three points
so if you want to look at it more carefully
each one of these points would actually be
an ordered pair enclosed in square brackets just
like that and i remind you that the set notation
means that the order in which we write these three
points doesn't matter so this set is also the same
as the set b c a or b a c and here's our notation
for the triangle abc just the three points with a
bar over it to denote the triangle and i just make
sure that we understand that if you have three
collinear points like these points d e
and f then this set is not a triangle
it does contain three points it isn't a set but
the three points are cleaner so technically it's
not a triangle all right so with those foundations
now let's ask how do we define a quadrilateral the
analogous object with four points instead of three
when it comes to quadrilaterals it's tempting to
just use a picture to write down something
like this and say well there's a quadrilateral
a b c d but we want a more precise definition and
here is one way of proceeding so let's have a good
look at this definition of a quadrilateral
we say that a b c d with a bar over it
is a quadrilateral means it is a list a b c d of
distinct points so there are four points in a list
no three which are collinear with the
further convention that a b c d that
quadrilateral formed from four points in that
order is the same as the quadrilateral b c d a
and also that a b c d is the same as a d c b so
let's have a look at what the definition means
first of all we have four points and we have
a list this is different from a set in a list
the order matters there's a first element
a second element a third element a fourth
element in this case so in a list we are not
allowed to change things around like that
okay and we're insisting that no three of these
points are collinear that's clear enough and
what's the significance of these two conventions
the convention is here that we are allowed to
rotate our list so if one person says oh this
is a b c d another person could come along and
say no this is the quadrilateral b c d a and
it would mean exactly the same quadrilateral
so in other words which of the points
we're starting with in our listing of them
doesn't matter the cyclical order does and this
rule captures that property we're allowed to
rotate the a from the beginning to the end and of
course you're allowed to do it again so you could
rotate that b around to the other side so the
same quadrilateral would be c d a b now what's the
meaning of this convention it means that you're
allowed to go in the opposite order and you have
the same quadrilateral so not only are we allowed
to start every anywhere we want to but we're also
allowed to go in either direction this way or
this way when we're listing those four points
this makes it very clear what exactly a
quadrilateral is and let's note that abcd
that quadrilateral is not equal to abdc so abcd
that's one quadrilateral a b d c in that order
that is a different quadrilateral okay
here are some additional conventions
about the quadrilateral abcd that we're
talking about here we say that the points
of the quadrilateral are exactly these four a
b c d those are the points of the quadrilateral
we say that the lines of the quadrilateral
are these four lines a b b c c cd and da
the other two possible lines that you could
create these ones here we call them diagonal lines
so they're separate from lines they have a
different relationship to the quadrilateral
in projective geometry which is
something we haven't introduced yet
there is a complete symmetry between points and
lines that's not the case of euclidean geometry
but in projective geometry it becomes very
interesting to talk also about quadrangles which
is basically exactly the same kind of definition
but we replace points and lines and lines with
points throughout but for elementary geometry the
notion of a quadrangle is really superfluous it's
really not needed the quadrilateral suffices
for most purposes let's have a look at how
we generalize the notion of quadrilateral
to an n-gon like a pentagon or a hexagon
so what is an n gone we choose an n a natural
number bigger than or equal to three to start with
and then we say that an n gone labeled
a1 a2 up to a n with a bar over it
is by definition a list it's a list
a 1 a 2 up to a n of distinct points
with some conventions first of all
you're allowed to rotate the first point
to the end and you have the same end gun
and you're allowed to go through those endpoints
in the opposite order instead of a1 a2 up to a
n you're allowed to say a n a n minus 1 through
to a1 so those two ways of ordering are the same
and finally we agree that no three
consecutive points are collinear
so for example here's a five gun a1 a2 a3 a4
a5 it happens to be non-convex that's all right
so that end gone would be the same as the
end gone a2 a3 a4 a5 a1 or a2 a1 a5 a4 a3
and the condition is that no three consecutive
points are collinear so a1 a2 a3 they're
consecutive or a4 a5 a1 they're also consecutive
and no three consecutive points are collinear
here's a 6-gon which is also non-convex a1 a2
a3a4a5a6 now we have some collinear points or
almost linear those three points might be linear
but they're not consecutive so it still counts as
an n-gone here's another six gone
one two three four five six points
this one here happens to be convex of course the
theory of n-gons in general is rather complicated
even quadrilaterals form a rather rich subject
for investigation but i wanted today just to
clarify the idea that it's important in
mathematics to be fussy about definitions and to
make sure that even things which appear familiar
need proper definitions and precise definitions
next time we are going to move on to
our third major branch of mathematics so far
we've been talking about arithmetic and geometry
next is algebra the third most important branch
of mathematics which forms a bridge between
arithmetic and geometry and of course
is a bit of a problem for many students
so i hope you'll join me for that i'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for listening